From Ireland thus comesYork to claim his right,
And pluck the crown fromfeeble Henry's head:
Ring, bells, aloud; burn,bonfires, clear and bright,
To entertain greatEngland's lawful king.
Ah! sancta majestas, whowould not buy thee dear?
Let them obey that knownot how to rule;
This hand was made tohandle naught but gold.
I cannot give due actionto my words,
Except a sword or sceptrebalance it:
A sceptre shall it have,have I a sword,
On which I'll toss theflower-de-luce of France.
Whom have we here?Buckingham, to disturb me?
The king hath sent him,sure: I must dissemble.
York, if thou meanestwell, I greet thee well.
Humphrey of Buckingham, Iaccept thy greeting.
Art thou a messenger, orcome of pleasure?
A messenger from Henry,our dread liege,
To know the reason ofthese arms in peace;
Or why thou, being asubject as I am,
Against thy oath and trueallegiance sworn,
Should raise so great apower without his leave,
Or dare to bring thy forceso near the court.
Scarce can I speak, mycholer is so great:
O, I could hew up rocksand fight with flint,
I am so angry at theseabject terms;
But I must make fairweather yet a while,
Till Henry be more weakand I more strong,--
Buckingham, I prithee,pardon me,
That I have given noanswer all this while;
My mind was troubled withdeep melancholy.
The cause why I havebrought this army hither
Is to remove proudSomerset from the king,
Seditious to his grace andto the state.
That is too muchpresumption on thy part:
But if thy arms be to noother end,
The king hath yielded untothy demand:
The Duke of Somerset is inthe Tower.
Upon thine honour, is heprisoner?
Upon mine honour, he isprisoner.
Then, Buckingham, I dodismiss my powers.
Soldiers, I thank you all;disperse yourselves;
Meet me to-morrow in St.George's field,
You shall have pay andevery thing you wish.
And let my sovereign,virtuous Henry,
Command my eldest son,nay, all my sons,
As pledges of my fealtyand love;
I'll send them all aswilling as I live:
Lands, goods, horse,armour, any thing I have,
Is his to use, so Somersetmay die.
York, I commend this kindsubmission:
(horns sound)
In all submission andhumility
York doth present himselfunto your highness.
Then what intends theseforces thou dost bring?
To heave the traitorSomerset from hence,
And fight against thatmonstrous rebel Cade,
Who since I heard to bediscomfited.
If one so rude and of somean disposition
May pass into the presenceof a king,
Lo, I present your grace atraitor's head,
The head of Cade, whom Iin combat slew.
The head of Cade! GreatGod, how just art Thou!
O, let me view his visage,being dead,
That living wrought mesuch exceeding trouble.
Tell me, my friend, artthou the man that slew him?
I was, an't like yourmajesty.
How art thou call'd? andwhat is thy degree?
Alexander Iden, that's myname;
A poor esquire of Kent,that loves his king.
So please it you, my lord,'twere not amiss
He were created knight forhis good service.
Iden, kneel down.
Rise up a knight.
We give thee for reward athousand marks,
And will that thouhenceforth attend on us.
May Iden live to meritsuch a bounty.
And never live but trueunto his liege!
See, Buckingham, Somersetcomes with the queen:
Go, bid her hide himquickly from the duke.
For thousand Yorks heshall not hide his head,
But boldly stand and fronthim to his face.
How now! is Somerset atliberty?
Then, York, unloose thylong-imprison'd thoughts,
And let thy tongue beequal with thy heart.
Shall I endure the sightof Somerset?
False king! why hast thoubroken faith with me,
Knowing how hardly I canbrook abuse?
King did I call thee? no,thou art not king,
Not fit to govern and rulemultitudes,
Which darest not, no, norcanst not rule a traitor.
That head of thine dothnot become a crown;
Thy hand is made to graspa palmer's staff,
And not to grace an awfulprincely sceptre.
That gold must round engirtthese brows of mine,
Whose smile and frown,like to Achilles' spear,
Is able with the change tokill and cure.
Here is a hand to hold asceptre up
And with the same to actcontrolling laws.
Give place: by heaven,thou shalt rule no more
O'er him whom heavencreated for thy ruler.
O monstrous traitor! Iarrest thee, York,
Of capital treason 'gainstthe king and crown;
Obey, audacious traitor;kneel for grace.
Wouldst have me kneel?first let me ask of these,
If they can brook I bow aknee to man.
Sirrah, call in my sons tobe my bail;
I know, ere they will haveme go to ward,
They'll pawn their swordsfor my enfranchisement.
Call hither Clifford! bidhim come amain,
To say if that the bastardboys of York
Shall be the surety fortheir traitor father.
O blood-besottedNeapolitan,
Outcast of Naples,England's bloody scourge!
The sons of York, thybetters in their birth,
Shall be their father'sbail; and bane to those
That for my surety willrefuse the boys!
See where they come: I'llwarrant they'll make it good.
And here comes Clifford todeny their bail.
Health and all happinessto my lord the king!
I thank thee, Clifford:say, what news with thee?
Nay, do not fright us withan angry look;
We are thy sovereign,Clifford, kneel again;
For thy mistaking so, wepardon thee.
This is my king, York, Ido not mistake;
But thou mistakest me muchto think I do:
To Bedlam with him! is theman grown mad?
Ay, Clifford; a bedlam andambitious humour
Makes him oppose himselfagainst his king.
He is a traitor; let himto the Tower,
And chop away thatfactious pate of his.
He is arrested, but willnot obey;
His sons, he says, shallgive their words for him.
Will you not, sons?
Ay, noble father, if ourwords will serve.
And if words will not,then our weapons shall.
Why, what a brood oftraitors have we here!
Look in a glass, and callthy image so:
I am thy king, and thou afalse-heart traitor.
Call hither to the stakemy two brave bears,
That with the very shakingof their chains
They may astonish thesefell-lurking curs:
Bid Salisbury and Warwickcome to me.
Are these thy bears? we'llbait thy bears to death.
And manacle the bear-wardin their chains,
If thou darest bring themto the baiting place.
Oft have I seen a hoto'erweening cur
Run back and bite, becausehe was withheld;
Who, being suffer'd withthe bear's fell paw,
Hath clapp'd his tailbetween his legs and cried:
And such a piece ofservice will you do,
If you oppose yourselvesto match Lord Warwick.
Hence, heap of wrath, foulindigested lump,
As crooked in thy mannersas thy shape!
Nay, we shall heed youthoroughly anon.
Take heed, lest by yourheat you burn yourselves.
Why, Warwick, hath thyknee forgot to bow?
Old Salisbury, shame tothy silver hair,
Thou mad misleader of thybrain-sick son!
O, where is faith? O,where is loyalty?
If it be banish'd from thefrosty head,
Where shall it find aharbour in the earth?
Wilt thou go dig a graveto find out war,
And shame thine honourableage with blood?
Why art thou old, andwant'st experience?
Or wherefore dost abuseit, if thou hast it?
For shame! in duty bendthy knee to me
That bows unto the gravewith mickle age.
My lord, I have consider'dwith myself
The title of this mostrenowned duke;
And in my conscience dorepute his grace
The rightful heir toEngland's royal seat.
Hast thou not swornallegiance unto me?
I have.
Canst thou dispense withheaven for such an oath?
It is great sin to swearunto a sin,
But greater sin to keep asinful oath.
Who shall be bound by anysolemn vow
To do a murderous deed, torob a man,
To force a spotlessvirgin's chastity,
To reave the orphan of hispatrimony,
To wring the widow fromher custom'd right,
And have no other reasonfor this wrong
But that he was bound by asolemn oath?
A subtle traitor needs nosophister.
Call Buckingham, and bidhim arm himself.
Call Buckingham, and allthe friends thou hast,
Both thou and they shall cursethis fatal hour.
I am resolved for death ordignity.
The first I warrant thee,if dreams prove true.
You were best to go to bedand dream again,
To keep thee from thetempest of the field.
I am resolved to bear agreater storm
Than any thou canstconjure up to-day;
And so to arms, victoriousfather,
To quell the rebels andtheir complices.
Fie! charity, for shame!speak not in spite,
For you shall sup withJesu Christ to-night.
Foul stigmatic, that'smore than thou canst tell.
If not in heaven, you'llsurely sup in hell.
(drums sounding)
Clifford of Cumberland,'tis Warwick calls:
And if thou dost not hidethee from the bear,
Now, when the angrytrumpet sounds alarum
And dead men's cries dofill the empty air,
Clifford, I say, comeforth and fight with me:
Proud northern lord,Clifford of Cumberland,
Warwick is hoarse withcalling thee to arms.
Of one or both of us thetime is come.
Hold, Warwick, seek theeout some other chase,
For I myself must huntthis deer to death.
Then, nobly, York; 'tisfor a crown thou fight'st.
As I intend, Clifford, tothrive to-day,
It grieves my soul toleave thee unassail'd.
What seest thou in me,York? why dost thou pause?
With thy brave bearingshould I be in love,
But that thou art so fastmine enemy.
Nor should thy prowesswant praise and esteem,
But that 'tis shownignobly and in treason.
So let it help me nowagainst thy sword
As I in justice and trueright express it.
My soul and body on theaction both!
A dreadful lay! Addressthee instantly.
The end crowns all.
Thus war hath given theepeace, for thou art still.
Peace with his soul,heaven, if it be thy will!
(battle cries)
Shame and confusion! allis on the rout;
Fear frames disorder, anddisorder wounds
Where it should guard. Owar, thou son of hell,
Whom angry heavens do maketheir minister
Throw in the frozen bosomsof our part
Hot coals of vengeance!
Let no soldier fly. He thatis truly dedicate to war
Hath no self-love, nor hethat loves himself
Hath not essentially butby circumstance
The name of valour.
O, let the vile world end,
And the premised flames ofthe last day
Knit earth and heaventogether!
Now let the generaltrumpet blow his blast,
Particularities and pettysounds
To cease!
Wast thou ordain'd,dear father,
To lose thy youth inpeace, and to achieve
The silver livery ofadvised age,
And, in thy reverence andthy chair-days, thus
To die in ruffian battle?Even at this sight
My heart is turn'd tostone: and while 'tis mine,
It shall be stony. Yorknot our old men spares;
No more will I theirbabes: tears virginal
Shall be to me even as thedew to fire,
And beauty that the tyrantoft reclaims
Shall to my flaming wrathbe oil and flax.
Henceforth I will not haveto do with pity:
Meet I an infant of thehouse of York,
Into as many gobbets willI cut it
As wild Medea youngAbsyrtus did:
In cruelty will I seek outmy fame.
Come, thou new ruin of oldClifford's house:
As did AEneas old Anchisesbear,
So bear I thee upon mymanly shoulders;
But then AEneas bare aliving load,
Nothing so heavy as thesewoes of mine.
So, lie thou there;
For underneath analehouse' paltry sign,
The Castle in SaintAlban's, Somerset
Hath made the wizardfamous in his death.
Sword, hold thy temper;heart, be wrathful still:
Priests pray for enemies,but princes kill.
Away, my lord! you areslow; for shame, away!
Can we outrun the heavens?good Margaret, stay.
What are you made of?you'll nor fight nor fly:
Now is it manhood, wisdomand defence,
To give the enemy way, andto secure us
By what we can, which canno more but fly.
If you be ta'en, we thenshould see the bottom
Of all our fortunes: butif we haply scape,
As well we may, if notthrough your neglect,
We shall to London get,where you are loved
And where this breach nowin our fortunes made
May readily be stopp'd.
But that my heart's onfuture mischief set,
I would speak blasphemyere bid you fly:
But fly you must;uncurable discomfit
Reigns in the hearts ofall our present parts.
Away, for your relief! andwe will live
To see their day and themour fortune give:
Away, my lord, away!
Of Salisbury, who canreport of him,
That winter lion, who inrage forgets
Aged contusions and allbrush of time,
And, like a gallant in thebrow of youth,
Repairs him with occasion?This happy day
Is not itself, nor have wewon one foot,
If Salisbury be lost.
My noble father,
Three times to-day I holphim to his horse,
Three times bestrid him;thrice I led him off,
Persuaded him from anyfurther act:
But still, where dangerwas, still there I met him;
And like rich hangings ina homely house,
So was his will in his oldfeeble body.
(drums sound)
But, noble as he is, lookwhere he comes.
Now, by my sword, wellhast thou fought to-day;
By the mass, so did weall. I thank you, Richard:
God knows how long it is Ihave to live;
And it hath pleased himthat three times to-day
You have defended me fromimminent death.
Well, lords, we have notgot that which we have:
'Tis not enough our foesare this time fled,
Being opposites of suchrepairing nature.
I know our safety is tofollow them;
For, as I hear, the kingis fled to London,
To call a present court ofparliament.
Let us pursue him ere thewrits go forth.
What says Lord Warwick?shall we after them?
After them! nay, beforethem, if we can.
Now, by my faith, lords,'twas a glorious day:
Saint Alban's battle wonby famous York
Shall be eternized in allage to come.
Sound drums and trumpets,and to London all:
And more such days asthese to us befall!
(drums sound)